1:30

\input{preamble}

\section{Introduction}

\subsection{Community Colleges}
%General
Massachusetts' community colleges are important institutions, both in their wide reaching scale and the life outcomes they can promise students. The fifteen Massachusetts community colleges In 2022, Massachusetts community colleges accounted for 46\% of all undergraduate enrollment and served 112,000 students. 

% SES
Part of what makes these institutions so attractive is their promise of boosting socioeconomic status for students. Associates degrees increase average lifetime earnings by \$450,000 for just two years of schooling. Perhaps more importantly though, community colleges give students pathways to earn bachelors degrees which, on average, increase lifetime earnings by \$1,000,000. Additionally, community colleges are historically cheap to attend, making their value enormous to low income students. The recent MassEducate program entirely eliminates tuition for Massachusetts residents without a prior degree, making the pathway to higher earning more possible than ever. 

%Diverse
On top of economic opportunity for students, community colleges offer the workforce a far more diverse student base than their four year counterparts. Half of all Hispanic students, 43\% of first generation students, and 52\% of Black students are community college educated (Lyon and Denner, 2016). Half of women in science, technology, engineering, or math (STEM) are community college educated (Lyon and Denner, 2016). Nationally, community colleges have far more disabled people (20\% of the student body). For Massachusetts specifically, of public four-year transfers, Black and Hispanic students each made up 21\% compared to White and Asian students each making up 13\% of the cohort. The more diverse student body of community colleges also allows minoritized people to more freely explore fields traditionally dominated by white men, generating more curiosity and more degrees for minoritized populations (Lyon \& Denner, 2016). Community colleges are a well of underrepresented voices, making their success vital for social justice outcomes within the state.

### EDITED
% Difficult
Many students aspire to earn a bachelors degree but never end up with one. Nationally, 81\% of students begin community college with the intention of transfer, while only 33\% actually transfer within 6 years, and only 14\% complete the bachelor degree (Valesco et al., 2023). A myriad of obstacles lie in students' path including, but not limited to: cost of tuition, poor advising structures, unreasonable transfer pathways, lack of class offerings within their schedules, nontransferable courses, poor social/emotional student support, and so-called "transfer shock" when students are becoming acclimated to their new school (Lakin \& Elliott, 2016). Often, these are on top of full time jobs and/or taking care of dependents at home. Each of these can compound, making degree attainment in practice very difficult.

Additionally, these factors do not impact everyone equally (Fink et al., 2016; Ma \& Baum, 2016). Women are overrepresented in community college demographics, while being underrepresented in bachelors attainment rates (Wang 2015; Surette, 2001). Black and Latine students are respectively 3-5\% and 7-10\% less likely to transfer than their White and Asian peers (Murnane et al., 2022). The students that end up earning a bachelors were also more likely to grow up near a technology hub city, had relatively higher SES, and younger (Jaggars et al., 2016; Valesco et al., 2024). Students between 18-19 had more than double the  bachelors completion rates than students above 25 years of age (19\% and 7\% respectively) (Valesco et al., 2024). A similar disparity exists between high income students and low income students, with high income students also maintaining more than double the success rates than their low income peers (20\% and 9\% respectively) (Valesco et al., 2024; Murnane et al., 2022).

More specifically, a well noted issue within higher education is that many credits fail to transfer from community colleges, requiring transfer students to spend more time and money for the same degree. Nationally, community college transfer students lose an average of 13 credits upon transfer which is equal to a complete semester of schooling (GAO, 2017). To mitigate this loss, Massachusetts' MassTransfer program guarantees many community college degrees transfer fully (60 credits; on its face, four semesters) to participating universities. There are two issues regarding the current scope of MassTransfer. The first is that only 5 of the 10 non-specialized public universities have (any) MassTransfer agreement in computer science, and second is that MassTransfer does not specify \textit{how} the credits transfer. In many cases, a large amount of them transfer as general elective credits, which in practice don't really get a student closer to degree completion. The main limiting factor for students graduation is fulfilling the degree requirements not the total amount of credits (which they generally earn in tandem with the degree and gen-ed requirements anyway). 60 transferable credit hours very rarely translates in-practice to the two years of schooling required to get them.

Additionally, Massachusetts community colleges are only shallowly incentivized to promote transfer. Of the 50\% of funding community colleges get from the state, only 5\% is determined by transfer. Of the funding categories, transfer is the least prioritized success metric of them all (Salomon-Fernandez, 2014). The public four-years within the state also have very little to no incentive to take transfer students from community colleges. There is no state kickback for enrolling more of them, an many of these schools already have competitive applicants who would come in as freshmen. The lack of incentive structure often leaves transfer students holding the bag, as they were promised opportunities upon registration (including credits, information, and support) (Wang 2020, p 153). 

\subsection{Computer Science}

%CS Trends
Computer science as a field is of particular interest to us for all of the reasons community colleges are important to us: its scope, potential for socioeconomic mobility, lack of diversity, and its poor transfer system. From 2017 the amount of computer science graduates has increased by over 51\%, following a wider trend of exponential growth within the major (NCES, 2023; NSC, 2024). At many schools, computer science enrollment is higher than all humanities degrees combined (Anderson, 2023). Of the many degrees a student could choose, computer science (CS) has some of the highest potential to situate students into high paying and stable careers. CS has a lucrative average salary, at about \$90,000 per year compared with the state average of \$56,000 for a bachelors (ZipRecruiter, 2024a; ZipRecruiter, 2024b).

% Diverse
Within CS, the demographic makeup of those in community colleges and professionals is the most disparate of any field (NCSES, 2023). While women make up close to half of most other STEM fields, women still only make up 22.6\% of recent graduates in computer science (IPEDS, 2022). More specifically, within Massachusetts public universities, 10.1\% of graduated male transfer students earned a computer science bachelors compared with a mere 0.7\% of graduated female transfer students. (Valesco et al., 2024).

% Difficult
For all of their potential for social and economic equality, CS degrees are also the pathways with the most institutional barriers. Barriers not merely in the academic content of the degree, but in terms of course articulation, breadth, prerequisite structures, and credit hour minimums (Jaggars et al., 2016). Due to the fields rapidly evolving pace, course content and articulation agreements need to be constantly updated, making transfer guarantees difficult and outdated information prevalent. STEM fields, and CS in particular, are also highly competitive and already have limited capacity for resident students, let alone transfers, additionally making guarantees and even entire transfer paths more unviable than other degrees (Wyner et al., 2016). A Californian longitudinal study found only 1\% of CS community college students followed the traditional "2+2" pathway (Jaggars et al., 2016).


\subsection{Roadmap}
% The Point of Our Paper
In this paper, we aim to analyze the computer science community college transfer landscape within Massachusetts. We chose Massachusetts as our subject mostly because we it call home, but also because it was the most recent state to follow the wave of free community college happening within the United States. Specifically, we analyze the course structures and articulation agreements of all the state's community colleges and all of its public universities to determine the structural barriers in place that impact all students, no matter their life circumstances. We hope that thoroughly analyzing the course structure will shine light on the difference between 60 credits and two years transferring. Any difference between these methods will yield higher cost in both time and money for transfer students, decreasing degree attainment.

\section{Methodology}
Part of our methodology we want to highlight throughout is the structural nature of our research questions. In all ways we can, we assume the omniscient and eager student to send through the each university's CS curriculum. In omniscience, we assume the student knows:
\begin{itemize}
    \item they want to pursue CS from the beginning;
    \item they want to transfer from the beginning;
    \item \textit{where} they want to transfer to from the beginning;
    \item they will be accepted to their four-year of choice;
    \item calc-readiness;
    \item which courses they could take will transfer to their institution;
\end{itemize}
In the eagerness assumption, we assume the student:
\begin{itemize}
    \item is able to handle any amount of CS or math courses in a single semester;
    \item transitions flawlessly into their four-year;
    \item gets into every class they need;
    \item has no work or life conflicts with course times;
    \item does not fail or withdraw from any course;
    \item takes as many courses as possible that double or triple count for other requirements;
    \item chooses the concentrations with the least total courses and prerequisites or the concentrations with the most articulation coverage;
    \item has adequate personal, social, and economic support to focus on their studies;
\end{itemize}

We chose this methodology for two interrelated reasons. First, and most importantly, the structural and institutional barriers are the ones that that the structures and institutions we analyze have the most control. Second, these are also the barriers that affect all students, regardless of personal situation, meaning these changes would have large impacts for many students. Thirdly, assuming imperfection would deeply complicate the methodology beyond the scope of this paper. Choosing which and how much of the above assumptions to give up would be arbitrary. Though obviously no student is the 'perfect' student outlined above, the ways they are imperfect are variant. Part of the difficulty regarding systemic obstacles are that different epistemic, technical, social, and economic barriers all compound on students in myriad ways dependent on their intersectional identities and socioeconomic status. Quantifying these for our purposes would be both reductionist and infeasible.

\subsection{Course Requirement Equivalencies}
We broadly replicate the methodology in a similar project studying transfer in Californian universities (Jiang et al., 2024). For each community college to four-year permutation, we wanted to determine how many courses required for a bachelors of science (BS) in computer science (CS) articulated in transfer.

First, we excluded the two schools that did not offer a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science: Massachusetts College of Art and Design and Massachusetts Maritime Academy. This left ten public four-years to analyze.\footnote{Bridgewater State, Fitchburg State, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts, Salem State, UMass Amherst, UMass Boston, UMass Dartmouth, UMass Lowell, Westfield State, and Worcester State} All but one of the community colleges offered an AS in computer science.\footnote{excepting Cape Cod Community College, which offers an AA in Computer Science Transfer. We included this degree in our analysis since it clearly fulfills the same role as any other transfer degree: transfer.} Where multiple computer science degrees were offered, we chose the one that would transfer, often simply called an associate's in CS Transfer. All fifteen Massachusetts community colleges were included, creating a total of 150 permutations.

Where a school has a complete articulation agreement with a community college, we manually gathered the data from the agreement itself, found on the \href{https://www.mass.edu/masstransfer/}{Massachusetts Department of Higher Education's MassTransfer}. Looking to MassTransfer first is crucial as many courses do not have direct 1:1 equivalencies. Many schools instead articulate groups of courses. Since only five out the ten universities have (any) MassTransfer articulation agreements in CS, we then turned to each university's official course equivalency software or document to then gather the data.

To compare schools on CS transfer specifically, we excluded general education requirements from collection and analysis, unless they were prerequisites to major requirements, keeping with Jiang et al. (2024). We did include elective courses, required natural science and ethics courses, and all required math courses. When choosing between which elective an ideal student would take, we chose the courses with most options for transfer and the least prerequisites.

For each university, we documented each of the course requirements for their BS's in computer science. For each of those requirements, we determined if each community college offered any course equivalent to it. For example, if a university offered Computer Science I, there would be 15 true or false values corresponding to whether that university could take credit from each of the 15 community colleges for that course. For each community college, we took the percent of true values over the total lower division required courses at the four year. We repeated this for every required course at each of the ten universities.

We then looked at the distribution of each of these courses based on their course codes. We made four groups: computing courses, math courses, natural science courses (including engineering), and humanities courses. For each course, we looked at the 15 possible articulations from the 15 local community colleges. If that community college offered a course that articulated to that course, that permutation was given a score of 1, otherwise 0. For example, if a university offered CS 101, and only 12 community colleges offered courses that could transfer, that course had a score of 12/15. For each four-year, we totaled the points within each category over the maximum possible points for that category (amount of required courses x 15 permutations). We then averaged the fractions for each course category across the all of the four-years. The utility of this methodology is to tell us with which field the issues are. Our hypothesis is that computing courses are substantially less likely to articulate compared with math, science, and humanities courses. One potential limitation of this method is that computer science requires more specific courses since we are looking at computer science degrees. Where a humanities or natural science requirement might have multiple courses that could fulfill the requirement, computer science might want particular courses as part of the core curriculum.

In our analysis, we look at both lower division courses and all courses. We look primarily at lower division courses since these are the courses that are exclusively offered to community college students. The idea of the transfer system is to complete the first two years of schooling at community college and then complete the latter two at a four-year, so it makes sense to compare community college with what would be offered in the first two years of a bachelors degree. We also calculated the total articulations for a complete BS degree, since there were some courses that counted as a junior level course or above.

\subsection{Curricular Complexity}

Our second methodology, also loosely following Jiang et al. (2024), measured the complexity of a 'resident' bachelor's degree at each public four-year compared with a transfer degree from their local community college. By 'resident' we mean that a student attended a university from their freshman to senior year. 

For the transfer side of the degree, we assumed the student would get an associates degree in computer science before transfer. We (slightly) diverge from our assumption of omniscience and eagerness for this section for three reasons. \textit{First}, if a student were to truly maximize credits, they would simply take every course that was a four-year requirement and then transfer, regardless of time. This result would be exactly equal to our first research question, making the methodology redundant. Taking the two methodologies together sharpens the structural contours of  the transfer process. The \textit{second} reason is that community college students are generally better off (Dadgar \& Trimble, 2015)\footnote{The most effecient route would be to take only required courses before transfer, but as a general pathway for students, associates are clear and comprehensive options for the average student} and more likely to pursue an AS (Wyner et al., 2016) than to not get a degree before transfer. 84\% of Massachusetts transfer students with 60 credits or more earned them through completing an associates degree (Murnane et al., 2022). This is likely due to the previously mentioned funding structure and because the AS pathways are clearly marked for students on school websites, lifting an epistemic barrier. \textit{Thirdly} and finally, taking into consideration general education requirements and assuming optimal elective choice, assuming an AS versus maximal transfer credit would not substantially change the student's pathways. We still maintain all other parts of the assumption, including minimal prerequisites, optimal general education pathways, choosing electives that can transfer, and no course failures.

Using this methodology, we decided to limit our scope here to just mapping the universities within 50 miles (driving distance, calculated using Google Maps). We chose proximity as the it is one of the largest contributing factors for transfer (Turley, 2009). 77\% of community college students said physical proximity was important or very important to their transfer decisions (Jabbar et al., 2017). Many community college students are commuters who have work, family obligations, roots, and/or permanent homes making them unlikely to move far away for a bachelor's degree. This is especially true for minoritized students (Turley 2009). Additionally, all universities had at least two community colleges within 50 miles, meaning each was well represented. 

In order to gather data, we used spreadsheet software to track a few different variables, including, but not limited to: course name, course code, course number, credit hours, prerequisites, if it's a community college or four-year course, and if its an elective. This allows us to compare degrees across multiple strata.\footnote{Looking back, it would have been far smarter (though more work) to make a formal database with every single course required for either an AS or BS, with each of these variables filled in. It would allow for much farther reaching conclusions, would be more manipulable with code, and would likely be of incredible use to CS departments in community colleges and four-years alike. We recommend future researchers interested in repeating or expanding our methodology to consider this alternative approach.} Our method was to add both the transfer and resident degree on top of eachother (resulting in 12 semesters of courses) and then deleting courses from the BS that has course equivalents in the AS. If everything articulated, then the degree would return to the traditional 8 semesters. With electives, if one of the possible AS elective courses could articulate to one of the possible elective or required courses at a four year, we considered those equivalent, upholding the eagerness assumption. The metrics we consider are three: curricular complexity, total credit hours, and percent of AS credit hours that articulate. 

To analyze and compare curricular complexity, we used \href{curriculranalytics.org}{curricularanalytics.org}'s web tool to automatically calculate the complexity of a degree path. This calculation takes into consideration the length of prerequisite chains and the amount of courses that have prerequisites within each chain. If there are more required courses, longer prerequisite chains (series of courses that need to follow eachother), and Curricula with higher curricular complexity take longer to complete, have lower graduation rates, and disproportionately affects women (Lionelle et al., 2024). We hypothesize that transfer degrees will be substantially more complex than resident degrees. We excluded Massasoit Community College and Roxbury Community College from our complexity analysis as their websites did not list course prerequisites. We emailed their computer science advising departments, but received no response.

To analyze the total credit hours, we compared the resident degree's base 120 required credit hours to the in practice total for transfer degrees. Many universities' resident general education requirements and degree requirements were shy of the required 120 credits, so we added free electives to the degree until the minimum was met. We then compared the difference between resident degrees and transfer degrees, translating them to semesters and average cost for students. 

Additionally, we measured the percent of the AS degree at each community college that could transfer to each of the colleges within 50 miles driving distance. This metric is importantly different from the total as a few universities have small computer science degrees. For example, UMass Amherst requires 24 general elective credits on top of general education and degree requirements to meet the minimum requirement of 120 credits total. According to the previous metric, 120 credits with a resident degree and 120 credits with a transfer degree on their face look similar without detailing much about the Amherst articulation agreements themselves. Supplementing this is the percent of the associates degree credits that could transfer (again, assuming the student took all the right courses and electives) adds needed context for informed policymaking. 

\subsection{Limitations}
The authors of this paper do not have access to the official advisor-centered resources at any of the schools. Their information is more likely to be up to date and accurate than the public and often unofficial agreements we drew from. \footnote{Where there are inaccuracies due to this, we argue that this is a weakness of the schools we study. The publicly available information that students use to plan their degree should be adequate to understand the curricular requirements.} Additionally, of course, there may be small mistakes in the data-gathering process; either in the content of the curricular structure itself or in inefficiencies of the curricular path. 

To mitigate this knowledge gap, we emailed the curricular maps we created to each of the colleges and universities to their respective advising teams. \textbf{X amount} graciously returned our emails, thankfully, fixing some small errors in our data collection. 

Additionally, this paper does not consider out of state transfer. We are comfortable with this limitation as our focus is specifically on Massachusetts state policy, but further research needs to be done to take into consideration the obstacles (or lack thereof) for students who either transfer into or out of Massachusetts. 

\section{Results}

We would like to reiterate that the results that follow are \textit{best case scenarios}. We assume the ideal student. For policy making, these results ought to be considered in tandem with the material and imperfect life students lead in situ.

\subsection{Course Requirement Equivalencies}

%Something to mind when observing the heatmap is it does not include degree size. 
% Something else to note is there is pretty much no difference when looking at just the first closest and just the second closest. The averge has a difference of just 1 (167.5 vs 166.5)

For lower division courses, the school that articulated the most courses was Fitchburg State with an average of 93\% of courses articulating. The school with the lowest articulation rate was Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts at an average 30\%.\footnote{It is worth noting that MCLA only graduates 8 computer science students per year, perhaps making them uninformative of the broader Massachusetts trends. The second lowest was Westfield State with an average of 44\%.} The average four-year had a rate of 61.4\%. This means that roughly 4 out of 10 lower division courses required for a Massachusetts BS cannot be taken at community college.

Additionally, it should be noted that a disproportionate amount of transferable courses were in fields other than computer science. Between required lower division computing, math, science, and humanities courses, computing had by far the lowest articulation percentage. Computing courses had on average a 45\% coverage rate, while math, science, and humanities courses all had above 75\% (77\%, 92\%, and 82\% respectively). In other words, a student can only 1 in 2 of the CS courses required for a BS in community college.

\subsection{Degree Mapping}

\subsubsection{Curricular Complexity}
We hypothesized that curricular pathways would be substantially more complex in transfer. This hypothesis was less consistent than we expected, but was still informative. We looked at three different metrics: First including general education requirements, second excluding general education requirements, and third including both precalculus and general education requirements. The median complexity of the transfer degrees both including and excluding general education requirements were fairly similar.

Notably, when precalculus was added, the difference in curricular complexity more than doubled. Such a jump shows the fragility the assumed ideal transfer scenario we constructed in our methodology. In other words, if a student fails to maximize course coverage (as most students, in practice, do), their degrees become substantially tougher to complete in a healthy or efficient manner. If a student not only needs to complete precalculus, but happens to fail a course their first time, comes to the degree in their second or third semester, or happens to choose a CS elective that does not transfer, the complexity compounds.

There were two schools that had more complex resident degrees than transfer degrees: Fitchburg State and UMass Dartmouth. Fitchburg State requires 13 general education courses while their local community college, Mount Wachusett Community College, only requires 6. Fitchburg has both a strong agreement with Mount Wachusett and a policy that means that general education requirements attained for an Associate's degree count as all general education requirements for Fitchburg. Since Wachusett has substantially less requirements than Fitchburg, a student would be able to shave off a semester of coursework at Fitchburg if the Associates is done with maximal efficiency. A resident degree at is more complex than transfer degrees, we hypothesize, due to strong articulation agreements and because the local community colleges simply have less prerequisites for the same courses.
\begin{table}[]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|}
       & Incl. Gen Eds & Excl. Gen Eds & Incl. Precalc\\
       4 Year & 157 & 145 & 167\\
       Transfer & 167.5 & 153.5 & 188.5
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{Median Curricular Complexity per Degree}
    \label{tab:currcomp}
\end{table}

% Interestingly, there were \textbf{NUMBER} transfer degrees that were \textit{less} complex than the resident degree. We hypothesize that the lessening complexity is due to general education requirements. The state of Massachusetts guarantees that all general education requirements must transfer to any public four-year institution, except for a maximum of eight credits (two courses). For example, Fitchburg State requires 13 general education courses while their local community college, Mount Wachusett Community College, only requires 6. The state requires these 6 to be equivalent to 11 of Fitchburg State's, meaning the transfer student is required to spend roughly a semester less time than the student who started at Fitchburg.\footnote{Though not legally required to, Fitchburg assures that all general education requirements are fulfilled by completing an associates degree, meaning, in this example, the 6 courses actually transfer as 13 courses.} Where the amount of general education courses were more comparable, transfer degrees were in general substantially more complex.

\subsubsection{Total Credit Hours}

In analyzing the curriculum between schools, we also determined the minimum amount of credits that would be required for graduation from a community college. We used the same three metrics as curricular complexity (gen eds, no gen eds, and precalculus). The median data are featured in the table below. When excluding general education requirements, no credit hours are lost (both have a difference of 16) showing that all of the added credit hours lie not within the structure of general education, but within the major's. If the usual assumption of 16 credit hours to a semester is applied, this means, at an absolute minimum, the average transfer student is spending an extra (and especially busy) semester at their transfer institution. The national average transfer credit loss, according to the U.S Government Accountability Office, is 13 credit hours (GAO, 2017). Given that an average Massachusetts student could not possibly transfer in CS retain more credits than the national \textit{in-practice} average is alarming, and more than enough reason for stakeholders to pay attention.

\subsubsection{Percent AS}

An average of 70.3\% of associates degree credits transferred, meaning an average of 29.7\% of associates degree credits failed to count. The lowest percentage of associates credit was MCLA at 37.8\%\footnote{The second lowest was UMass Boston, accepting an average of 53.4\% credits.} and the highest percentage was UMass Lowell at 89.3\%. This metric, like the prior metric, included free electives to shore up the minimum 120 credits. 

\begin{table}[]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{c|cl}
 &Credit Hours&\% of AS\\
 Resident& 120& 100\%
\\
         Transfer& 
     133& 70.3\%\\
 Difference& 13& 29.7\%\\\end{tabular}
    \caption{Differences in Resident and Transfer Degrees}
    \label{tab:my_label}
\end{table}



\section{Conclusion}

Given the substantially tougher time transfer students navigating Massachusetts' transfer system, we urge policy changes to CS articulation from all capable parties: The State, Public Universities, and Community Colleges.

At the very least, the 'perfect computer science student' should be guaranteed to graduate in 120 credits or less; it should be \textit{in theory possible} for someone to graduate in four years. Even within other STEM fields, a perfectly organized four years generally earns a degree. Most of the non-CS STEM courses transfered with ease, and very careful thought has been This requires buy in from all parties: community colleges and four-years to come together and design curriculum that mesh well together; four-years to somewhat unify their introductory computer science courses so students at community colleges are not limited to the one university that has the same curriculum as them; the state to properly 

Clear information is crucial for students. Even as researchers who took months to work on this project and were paid to do so, we struggled with understanding many of the details -- both rough and fine -- of transfer. For all schools, requirements ought to be clear, labelled with course codes, prerequisites, and credits. Course equivalency sheet should also be easily legible and hearty with information. For example, MassTransfer's design is informative and clear. 

% At present, there is no incentive for transfer. Community colleges have held the brunt of responsibility for transfer. In conversation with community college computer science chairs within the state, multiple four-years refuse to sit with them to create transferable course materials. Community colleges are often left to do their best to replicate the early curriculum of all local four-years, with very little to no collaboration or input from the four-years. Both community colleges and four-years are responsible for transfer. 

% There are no incentives for transfer. Community colleges have no material incentive to encourage transfer (as paychecks come from AS degree attainments rather than successful transfers), and four-years have no incentive if there are already many students wanting into their school (as is often the case with such a booming degree as computer science). However, this leaves students holding the bag, as they were promised transfer opportunities upon registration (including credits, information, and support) (Wang 2020, p 153). 

\begin{acks}
Acknowledgements go here. Delete enclosing begin/end markers if there are no acknowledgements.
\end{acks}

%%
%% The next two lines define the bibliography style to be used, and
%% the bibliography file.
\bibliographystyle{ACM-Reference-Format}
\bibliography{references.bib}

\end{document}
\endinput