Measurement is a tool used to classify, organize, and coagulate different disparate things. 

## Seeing Effective Altruism Like a State
See [[Scott]], [[Gabriel]]
See [[A2 EA]], [[Global Poverty]], [[Moral Measurement]]
See Social Constructivism in [[Philosophy of Science]]
### Utilitarian Measurement
See [[Gabriel]]
A core piece of Effective Altruism is being able to quantify what the most dire issues are and deciding how best to solve it with empirically measurable results. Currently, the way organizations calculate these results is by condensing situations into a number of Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALY, pronounced “qua-lee”). They are measured as a factor of health and income over the period of a year for one individual whereas one year at a 8/10 wellbeing score is equal to two 4/10 years. In 2016, philosopher and economist Iason Gabriel published Effective Altruism and its Critics which points out methodological holes in the charity evaluation website, GiveWell showing flaws in coagulating differing charity impact (measured in QALYs) from different organizations. Some of these were small statistical changes, but a few others were full methodological critiques for how EA runs by pointing out a few technocratic biases such as Observational Bias and Quantification Bias. 

By trying to push every outcome into the format of a QALY, it misses many of the unobservable, or even just nonobvious, good impacts that can come from charity work such as community cohesion, self-governance, or economic shockwave effects. This approach also misses important effects that can’t be put into one neat unit but are still important to those impacted. One example mentioned in the paper is of a government wondering whether to provide condoms to prevent AIDS spread or anti-retrovirals for helping stop AIDS symptoms within already infected individuals. Although distributing condoms will lead to the highest yield of QALYs, reducing the moral calculus to merely this forgoes many other values. Even though providing condoms might be most efficient for saving lives, only doing that neglects a lot of values that are important such as not forsaking every person with AIDS to have no hope of living. 

Although there have been initiatives to create a more sophisticated measure that takes into consideration subjective wellbeing by Michael Plant from the Happier Lives Institute (units he calls WELLBYs), there are still critical problems with these measures including how they translate interpersonally, how they translate between species, how they justify current limits on happiness-potential for the global poor, and how to incorporate suffering or ‘bad lives’ into the calculus. 

### Generalization is Inherent in Metanarrativity
See [[Scott]]
Anthropologist James Scott would argue that these ‘cut corners’ and incomplete images upon which EA data scientists project onto people are part of the nature of the technocratic scientific approach. In his book Seeing Like a State, Scott argues that when large technocratic organizations are tasked with arranging local peoples, they cut corners in order to make all of the units commensurable. For data scientists to measure different people with different methods and different cultural structures comparable, everything needs to be boxed into one unit that cannot represent all of the intricacies of local life. One example is the French government partitioning farming land only by area while forgoing the traditional (and well oiled) local system that takes into consideration the nutrients, area, slope, soil quality and ease of access to water. Although the rugged borders produced by the local farmers seemed archaic and arbitrary from a top down perspective, they created the most equitable distribution of land for those working it. By condensing the local system into a measure of just area, the French government caused environmental injustice that led to people starving due to them not having adequately fertile land to survive. Scott argues that the larger the scope of a project, the more bad information will arise that refuses to reflect the life of the individuals they are supposed to represent. 3 4

For EA projects, highly specialized individuals currently cut similar corners by not understanding important localized values or even any values beyond utilitarianism. With these swift reductions of complex moral lives into simple QALYs, many values are cast aside meaning that the most effective results for these communities might not be reached. By trying to solve all applied ethical problems from the armchair and imposing the solutions across the globe unilaterally, there is inevitably going to be large inefficiencies.
