> We must rather admit that power produces knowledge (and not simply by promoting it because it serves it or by applying it because it is useful); that power and knowledge directly imply each other; that there is no relation of power without the correlative constitution of a field of knowledge, nor of knowledge which does not suppose and does not constitute at the same time relations of power. These relations of “power-knowledge” are therefore not to be analyzed on the basis of a subject of knowledge who may or may not be free in relation to the system of power; but we must consider, on the contrary, that the subject who knows, the objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge are so many effects of these fundamental implications of power-knowledge and of their historical transformations. In short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge that would produce knowledge, whether useful or resistant to power, but power-knowledge, the processes and struggles that traverse it and of which it is constituted, that determine the possible forms and domains of knowledge. (pp. 288-289)

Foucault, M. (2015). Surveiller et punir. In M. Foucault (Ed.). _Oeuvres II_ (pp. 261-613). Paris : Gallimard. (Original publié en 1975)

> For myself, I prefer to utilize the writers I like. The only valid tribute to thought such as Nietzsche’s is precisely to use it, to deform it, to make it groan and protest. And if the commentators say that I am being faithful or unfaithful to Nietzsche, then that is of absolutely no interest.

Foucault, “Prison Talk,” in Foucault, Power/Knowledge, p. 54.